 Dune Messiah is the most misunderstood of Frank Herbert’s novels. The
 reasons for this are as fascinating and complex as the renowned author
 himself.
 Just before this first sequel to Dune was published in 1969, it ran in
 installments in the science fiction magazine Galaxy. The serialized “Dune
 Messiah” was named “disappointment of the year” by the satirical
 magazine National Lampoon. The story had earlier been rejected by Analog
 editor John W. Campbell, who, like the Lampooners, loved the majestic,
 heroic aspects of Dune and hated the antithetical elements of the sequel. His
 readers wanted stories about heroes accomplishing great feats, he said, not
 stories of protagonists with “clay feet.”
 The detractors did not understand that Dune Messiah was a bridging
 work, connecting Dune with an as-yet-uncompleted third book in the
 trilogy. To get there, the second novel in the series flipped over the carefully
 crafted hero myth of Paul Muad’Dib and revealed the dark side of the
 messiah phenomenon that had appeared to be so glorious in Dune. Many
 readers didn’t want that dose of reality; they couldn’t stand the demotion of
 their beloved, charismatic champion, especially after the author had already
 killed off two of their favorite characters in Dune, the loyal Atreides
 swordmaster Duncan Idaho
 1 and the idealistic planetologist Liet-Kynes.
 But they overlooked important clues that Frank Herbert had left along the
 way. In Dune, when Liet-Kynes lay dying in the desert, he remembered
 these words of his father, Pardot, spoken years before and relegated to the
 back reaches of memory: “No more terrible disaster could befall your
 people than for them to fall into the hands of a Hero.” Near the end of the
 novel, in a foreshadowing epigraph, Princess Irulan described the victorious
Muad’Dib in multifaceted and sometimes conflicting terms as “warrior and
 mystic, ogre and saint, the fox and the innocent, chivalrous, ruthless, less
 than a god, more than a man.” And in an appendix to Dune, Frank Herbert
 wrote that the desert planet “was afflicted by a Hero.”
 These sprinklings in Dune were markers pointing in the direction Frank
 Herbert had in mind, transforming a utopian civilization into a violent
 dystopia. In fact, the original working title for the second book in the series
 was Fool Saint, which he would change two more times before settling on
 Dune Messiah. But in the published novel, he wrote, concerning Muad’Dib:
 He is the fool saint,  
The golden stranger living forever  
On the edge of reason.  
Let your guard fall and he is there!
 The author felt that heroic leaders often made mistakes … mistakes that
 were amplified by the number of followers who were held in thrall by
 charisma. As a political speechwriter in the 1950s, Dad had worked in
 Washington, D.C., and had seen the megalomania of leadership and the
 pitfalls of following magnetic, charming politicians. Planting yet another
 interesting seed in Dune, he wrote, “It is said in the desert that possession of
 water in great amount can inflict a man with fatal carelessness.” This was
 an important reference to Greek hubris. Very few readers realized that the
 story of Paul Atreides was not only a Greek tragedy on an individual and
 familial scale. There was yet another layer, even larger, in which Frank
 Herbert was warning that entire societies could be led to ruination by
 heroes. In Dune and Dune Messiah, he was cautioning against pride and
 overconfidence, that form of narcissism described in Greek tragedies that
 invariably led to the great fall.
 Among the dangerous leaders of human history, my father sometimes
 mentioned General George S. Patton because of his charismatic qualities—
 but more often his example was President John F. Kennedy. Around
 Kennedy, a myth of kingship had formed, and of Camelot. The handsome
 young president’s followers did not question him and would have gone
 virtually anywhere he led them. This danger seems obvious to us now in the
 cases of such men as Adolf Hitler, whose powerful magnetism led his
 nation into ruination. It is less obvious, however, with men who are not
deranged or evil in and of themselves—such as Kennedy, or the fictional
 Paul Muad’Dib, whose danger lay in the religious myth structure around
 him and what people did in his name.
 Among my father’s most important messages were that governments lie
 to protect themselves and they make incredibly stupid decisions. Years after
 the publication of Dune, Richard M. Nixon provided ample proof. Dad said
 that Nixon did the American people an immense favor in his attempt to
 cover up the Watergate misdeeds. By amplified example, albeit unwittingly,
 the thirty-seventh president of the United States taught people to question
 their leaders. In interviews and impassioned speeches on university
 campuses all across the country, Frank Herbert warned young people not to
 trust government, telling them that the American founding fathers had
 understood this and had attempted to establish safeguards in the
 Constitution.
 In the transition from Dune to Dune Messiah, Dad accomplished
 something of a sleight of hand. In the sequel, while emphasizing the actions
 of the heroic Paul Muad’Dib, as he had done in Dune, the author was also
 orchestrating monumental background changes and dangers involving the
 machinations of the people surrounding that leader. Several people would
 vie for position to become closest to Paul; in the process they would secure
 for themselves as much power as possible, and some would misuse it, with
 dire consequences.
 After the Dune series became wildly popular, many fans began to
 consider Frank Herbert in a light that he had not sought and which he did
 not appreciate. In one description of him, he was referred to as “a guru of
 science fiction.” Others depicted him in heroic terms. To counter this, in
 remarks that were consistent with his Paul Atreides characterization, Frank
 Herbert told interviewers that he did not want to be considered a hero, and
 he sometimes said to them, with disarming humility, “I’m nobody.”
 Certainly my father was anything but that. In Dreamer of Dune, the
 biography I wrote about him, I described him as a legendary author. But in
 his lifetime, he sought to avoid such a mantle. As if whispering in his own
 ear, Frank Herbert constantly reminded himself that he was mortal. If he
 had been a politician, he would have undoubtedly been an honorable one,
 perhaps even one of our greatest U.S. presidents. He might have attained
 that high office, or reached any number of other lofty goals, had he decided
 to do so. But as a science fiction fan myself, I’m glad he took the course
that he did. Because he was a great writer, his cautionary words will carry
 on through the ages and hopefully influence people in decision-making
 positions, causing them to set up safeguards that will protect against abuses
 of power, both by leaders and by their followers.
 As you read Dune Messiah, enjoy the adventure story, the suspense, the
 marvelous characterizations and exotic settings. Then go back and read it
 again. You’ll discover something new on each pass through the pages. And
 you’ll get to know Frank Herbert better as a human being.
 Brian Herbert  
Seattle, Washington  
October 16, 2007
EXCERPTS FROM THE DEATH CELL
 INTERVIEW WITH BRONSO OF IX—
 Q: What led you to take your particular approach to a history of Muad’dib?
 A: Why should I answer your questions?
 Q: Because I will preserve your words.
 A: Ahhh! The ultimate appeal to a historian!
 Q: Will you cooperate then?
 A: Why not? But you’ll never understand what inspired my Analysis of
 History. Never. You Priests have too much at stake to …
 Q: Try me.
 A: Try you? Well, again … why not? I was caught by the shallowness of the
 common view of this planet which arises from its popular name: Dune. Not
 Arrakis, notice, but Dune. History is obsessed by Dune as desert, as
 birthplace of the Fremen. Such history concentrates on the customs which
 grew out of water scarcity and the fact that Fremen led semi-nomadic lives
 in stillsuits which recovered most of their body’s moisture.
 Q: Are these things not true, then?
 A: They are surface truth. As well ignore what lies beneath that surface as
 … as try to understand my birthplanet, Ix, without exploring how we
 derived our name from the fact that we are the ninth planet of our sun. No
 … no. It is not enough to see Dune as a place of savage storms. It is not
 enough to talk about the threat posed by the gigantic sandworms.
 Q: But such things are crucial to the Arrakeen character!
 A: Crucial? Of course. But they produce a one-view planet in the same way
 that Dune is a one-crop planet because it is the sole and exclusive source of
 the spice, melange.
 Q: Yes. Let us hear you expand on the sacred spice.
 A: Sacred! As with all things sacred, it gives with one hand and takes with
 the other. It extends life and allows the adept to foresee his future, but it ties
 him to a cruel addiction and marks his eyes as yours are marked: total blue
 without any white. Your eyes, your organs of sight, become one thing
 without contrast, a single view. Q: Such heresy brought you to this cell!
 A: I was brought to this cell by your Priests. As with all priests, you learned
 early to call the truth heresy.
Q: You are here because you dared to say that Paul Atreides lost something
 essential to his humanity before he could become Muad’dib.
 A: Not to speak of his losing his father here in the Harkonnen war.
 Nor the death of Duncan Idaho, who sacrificed himself that Paul and the
 Lady Jessica could escape.
 Q: Your cynicism is duly noted.
 A: Cynicism! That, no doubt is a greater crime than heresy. But, you see,
 I’m not really a cynic. I’m just an observer and commentator. I saw true
 nobility in Paul as he fled into the desert with his pregnant mother. Of
 course, she was a great asset as well as a burden. Q: The flaw in you
 historians is that you’ll never leave well enough alone. You see true nobility
 in the Holy Muad’dib, but you must append a cynical footnote. It’s no
 wonder that the Bene Gesserit also denounce you.
 A: You Priests do well to make common cause with the Bene Gesserit
 Sisterhood. They, too, survive by concealing what they do. But they cannot
 conceal the fact that the Lady Jessica was a Bene Gesserit-trained adept.
 You know she trained her son in the sisterhood’s ways. My crime was to
 discuss this as a phenomenon, to expound upon their mental arts and their
 genetic program. You don’t want attention called to the fact that Muad’dib
 was the Sisterhood’s hoped for captive messiah, that he was their kwisatz
 haderach before he was your prophet.
 Q: If I had any doubts about your death sentence, you have dispelled them.
 A: I can only die once.
 Q: There are deaths and there are deaths.
 A: Beware lest you make a martyr of me. I do not think Muad’dib … Tell
 me, does Muad’dib know what you do in these dungeons?
 Q: We do not trouble the Holy Family with trivia.
 A: (Laughter) And for this Paul Atreides fought his way to a niche among
 the Fremen! For this he learned to control and ride the sandworm! It was a
 mistake to answer your questions.
 Q: But I will keep my promise to preserve your words.
 A: Will you really? Then listen to me carefully, you Fremen degenerate,
 you Priest with no god except yourself! You have much to answer for. It
 was a Fremen ritual which gave Paul his first massive dose of melange,
 thereby opening him to visions of his futures. It was a Fremen ritual by
 which that same melange awakened the unborn Alia in the Lady Jessica’s
 womb. Have you considered what it meant for Alia to be born into this
universe fully cognitive, possessed of all her mother’s memories and
 knowledge? No rape could be more terrifying.
 Q: Without the sacred melange Muad’dib would not have become leader of
 all Fremen. Without her holy experience Alia would not be Alia.
 A: Without your blind Fremen cruelty you would not be a priest. Ahhh, I
 know you Fremen. You think Muad’dib is yours because he mated with
 Chani, because he adopted Fremen customs. But he was an Atreides first
 and he was trained by a Bene Gesserit adept. He possessed disciplines
 totally unknown to you. You thought he brought you new organization and
 a new mission. He promised to transform your desert planet into a water
rich paradise. And while he dazzled you with such visions, he took your
 virginity!
 Q: Such heresy does not change the fact that the Ecological Transformation
 of Dune proceeds apace.
 A: And I committed the heresy of tracing the roots of that transformation,
 of exploring the consequences. That battle out there on the Plains of
 Arrakeen may have taught the universe that Fremen could defeat Imperial
 Sardaukar, but what else did it teach? When the stellar empire of the
 Corrino Family became a Fremen empire under Muad’dib, what else did the
 Empire become? Your Jihad only took twelve years, but what a lesson it
 taught. Now, the Empire understands the sham of Muad’dib’s marriage to
 the Princess Irulan!
 Q: You dare accuse Muad’dib of sham!
 A: Though you kill me for it, it’s not heresy. The Princess became his
 consort, not his mate. Chani, his little Fremen darling—she’s his mate.
 Everyone knows this. Irulan was the key to a throne, nothing more.
 Q: It’s easy to see why those who conspire against Muad’dib use your
 Analysis of History as their rallying argument!
 A: I’ll not persuade you; I know that. But the argument of the conspiracy
 came before my Analysis. Twelve years of Muad’dib’s Jihad created the
 argument. That’s what united the ancient power groups and ignited the
 conspiracy against Muad’dib.
Such a rich store of myths enfolds Paul Muad’dib, the Mentat Emperor, and his sister, Alia, it
 is difficult to see the real persons behind these veils. But there were, after all, a man born Paul
 Atreides and a woman born Alia. Their flesh was subject to space and time. And even though
 their oracular powers placed them beyond the usual limits of time and space, they came from
 human stock. They experienced real events which left real traces upon a real universe. To
 understand them, it must be seen that their catastrophe was the catastrophe of all mankind.
 This work is dedicated, then, not to Muad’dib or his sister, but to their heirs—to all of us.
 —DEDICATION IN THE MUAD’DIB CONCORDANCE AS COPIED FROM THE TABLA
 MEMORIUM OF THE MAHDI SPIRIT CULT
 Muad’dib’s Imperial reign generated more historians than any other era in
 human history. Most of them argued a particular viewpoint, jealous and
 sectarian, but it says something about the peculiar impact of this man that
 he aroused such passions on so many diverse worlds.
 Of course, he contained the ingredients of history, ideal and idealized.
 This man, born Paul Atreides in an ancient Great Family, received the deep
 prana-bindu training from the Lady Jessica, his Bene Gesserit mother, and
 had through this a superb control over muscles and nerves. But more than
 that, he was a mentat, an intellect whose capacities surpassed those of the
 religiously proscribed mechanical computers used by the ancients.
 Above all else, Muad’dib was the kwisatz haderach which the
 Sisterhood’s breeding program had sought across thousands of generations.
 The kwisatz haderach, then, the one who could be “many places at once,”
 this prophet, this man through whom the Bene Gesserit hoped to control
 human destiny—this man became Emperor Muad’dib and executed a
 marriage of convenience with a daughter of the Padishah Emperor he had
 defeated.
 Think on the paradox, the failure implicit in this moment, for you surely
 have read other histories and know the surface facts. Muad’dib’s wild
 Fremen did, indeed, overwhelm the Padishah Shad-dam IV. They toppled
 the Sardaukar legions, the allied forces of the Great Houses, the Harkonnen
 armies and the mercenaries bought with money voted in the Landsraad. He
brought the Spacing Guild to its knees and placed his own sister, Alia, on
 the religious throne the Bene Gesserit had thought their own.
 He did all these things and more.
 Muad’dib’s Qizarate missionaries carried their religious war across space
 in a Jihad whose major impetus endured only twelve standard years, but in
 that time, religious colonialism brought all but a fraction of the human
 universe under one rule.
 He did this because capture of Arrakis, that planet known more often as
 Dune, gave him a monopoly over the ultimate coin of the realm—the
 geriatric spice, melange, the poison that gave life.
 Here was another ingredient of ideal history: a material whose psychic
 chemistry unraveled Time. Without melange, the Sisterhood’s Reverend
 Mothers could not perform their feats of observation and human control.
 Without melange, the Guild’s Steersmen could not navigate across space.
 Without melange, billions upon billions of Imperial citizens would die of
 addictive withdrawal.
 Without melange, Paul-Muad’dib could not prophesy.
 We know this moment of supreme power contained failure. There can be
 only one answer, that completely accurate and total prediction is lethal.
 Other histories say Muad’dib was defeated by obvious plotters—the
 Guild, the Sisterhood and the scientific amoralists of the Bene Tleilax with
 their Face-Dancer disguises. Other histories point out the spies in
 Muad’dib’s household. They make much of the Dune Tarot which clouded
 Muad’dib’s powers of prophecy. Some show how Muad’dib was made to
 accept the services of a ghola, the flesh brought back from the dead and
 trained to destroy him. But certainly they must know this ghola was Duncan
 Idaho, the Atreides lieutenant who perished saving the life of the young
 Paul.
 Yet, they delineate the Qizarate cabal guided by Korba the Panegyrist.
 They take us step by step through Korba’s plan to make a martyr of
 Muad’dib and place the blame on Chani, the Fremen concubine.
 How can any of this explain the facts as history has revealed them? They
 cannot. Only through the lethal nature of prophecy can we understand the
 failure of such enormous and far-seeing power.
 Hopefully, other historians will learn something from this revelation.
—Analysis of History: Muad’dib  
by Bronso of Ix
There exists no separation between gods and men; one blends softly casual into the other.
 —PROVERBS OF MUAD’DIB
 Despite the murderous nature of the plot he hoped to devise, the thoughts of
 Scytale, the Tleilaxu Face Dancer, returned again and again to rueful
 compassion.
 I shall regret causing death and misery to Muad’dib, he told himself. He
 kept this benignity carefully hidden from his fellow conspirators. Such
 feelings told him, though, that he found it easier to identify with the victim
 than with the attackers—a thing characteristic of the Tleilaxu.
 Scytale stood in bemused silence somewhat apart from the others. The
 argument about psychic poison had been going on for some time now. It
 was energetic and vehement, but polite in that blindly compulsive way
 adepts of the Great Schools always adopted for matters close to their
 dogma.
 “When you think you have him skewered, right then you’ll find him
 unwounded!”
 That was the old Reverend Mother of the Bene Gesserit, Gaius Helen
 Mohiam, their hostess here on Wallach IX. She was a black-robed stick
 figure, a witch crone seated in a floater chair at Scytale’s left. Her aba hood
 had been thrown back to expose a leathery face beneath silver hair. Deeply
 pocketed eyes stared out of skull-mask features.
 They were using a mirabhasa language, honed phalange consonants and
 joined vowels. It was an instrument for conveying fine emotional subtleties.
 Edric, the Guild Steersman, replied to the Reverend Mother now with a
 vocal curtsy contained in a sneer—a lovely touch of disdainful politeness.
 Scytale looked at the Guild envoy. Edric swam in a container of orange
 gas only a few paces away. His container sat in the center of the transparent
 dome which the Bene Gesserit had built for this meeting. The Guildsman
 was an elongated figure, vaguely humanoid with finned feet and hugely
 fanned membranous hands—a fish in a strange sea. His tank’s vents emitted
 a pale orange cloud rich with the smell of the geriatric spice, melange.
“If we go on this way, we’ll die of stupidity!”
 That was the fourth person present—the potential member of the
 conspiracy—Princess Irulan, wife (but not mate, Scytale reminded himself )
 of their mutual foe. She stood at a corner of Edric’s tank, a tall blond
 beauty, splendid in a robe of blue whale fur and matching hat. Gold buttons
 glittered at her ears. She carried herself with an aristocrat’s hauteur, but
 something in the absorbed smoothness of her features betrayed the controls
 of her Bene Gesserit background.
 Scytale’s mind turned from nuances of language and faces to nuances of
 location. All around the dome lay hills mangy with melting snow which
 reflected mottled wet blueness from the small blue-white sun hanging at the
 meridian.
 Why this particular place? Scytale wondered. The Bene Gesserit seldom
 did anything casually. Take the dome’s open plan: a more conventional and
 confining space might’ve inflicted the Guildsman with claustrophobic
 nervousness. Inhibitions in his psyche were those of birth and life off-planet
 in open space.
 To have built this place especially for Edric, though—what a sharp finger
 that pointed at his weakness.
 What here, Scytale wondered, was aimed at me?
 “Have you nothing to say for yourself, Scytale?” the Reverend Mother
 demanded.
 “You wish to draw me into this fools’ fight?” Scytale asked. “Very well.
 We’re dealing with a potential messiah. You don’t launch a frontal attack
 upon such a one. Martyrdom would defeat us.”
 They all stared at him.
 “You think that’s the only danger?” the Reverend Mother demanded,
 voice wheezing.
 Scytale shrugged. He had chosen a bland, round-faced appearance for
 this meeting, jolly features and vapid full lips, the body of a bloated
 dumpling. It occurred to him now, as he studied his fellow conspirators, that
 he had made an ideal choice—out of instinct perhaps. He alone in this
 group could manipulate fleshly appearance across a wide spectrum of
 bodily shapes and features. He was the human chameleon, a Face Dancer,
 and the shape he wore now invited others to judge him too lightly.
 “Well?” the Reverend Mother pressed.
“I was enjoying the silence,” Scytale said. “Our hostilities are better left
 unvoiced.”
 The Reverend Mother drew back, and Scytale saw her reassessing him.
 They were all products of profound prana-bindu training, capable of muscle
 and nerve control that few humans ever achieved. But Scytale, a Face
 Dancer, had muscles and nerve linkages the others didn’t even possess plus
 a special quality of sympatico, a mimic’s insight with which he could put on
 the psyche of another as well as the other’s appearance.
 Scytale gave her enough time to complete the reassessment, said:
 “Poison!” He uttered the word with the atonals which said he alone
 understood its secret meaning.
 The Guildsman stirred and his voice rolled from the glittering speaker
 globe which orbited a corner of his tank above Irulan. “We’re discussing
 psychic poison, not a physical one.”
 Scytale laughed. Mirabhasa laughter could flay an opponent and he held
 nothing back now.
 Irulan smiled in appreciation, but the corners of the Reverend Mother’s
 eyes revealed a faint hint of anger.
 “Stop that!” Mohiam rasped.
 Scytale stopped, but he had their attention now, Edric in a silent rage, the
 Reverend Mother alert in her anger, Irulan amused but puzzled.
 “Our friend Edric suggests,” Scytale said, “that a pair of Bene Gesserit
 witches trained in all their subtle ways have not learned the true uses of
 deception.”
 Mohiam turned to stare out at the cold hills of her Bene Gesserit
 homeworld. She was beginning to see the vital thing here, Scytale realized.
 That was good. Irulan, though, was another matter.
 “Are you one of us or not, Scytale?” Edric asked. He stared out of tiny
 rodent eyes.
 “My allegiance is not the issue,” Scytale said. He kept his attention on
 Irulan. “You are wondering, Princess, if this was why you came all those
 parsecs, risked so much?”
 She nodded agreement.
 “Was it to bandy platitudes with a humanoid fish or dispute with a fat
 Tleilaxu Face Dancer?” Scytale asked.
 She stepped away from Edric’s tank, shaking her head in annoyance at
 the thick odor of melange.
Edric took this moment to pop a melange pill into his mouth. He ate the
 spice and breathed it and, no doubt, drank it, Scytale noted. Understandable,
 because the spice heightened a Steersman’s prescience, gave him the power
 to guide a Guild heighliner across space at translight speeds. With spice
 awareness he found that line of the ship’s future which avoided peril. Edric
 smelled another kind of peril now, but his crutch of prescience might not
 find it.
 “I think it was a mistake for me to come here,” Irulan said.
 The Reverend Mother turned, opened her eyes, closed them, a curiously
 reptilian gesture.
 Scytale shifted his gaze from Irulan to the tank, inviting the Princess to
 share his viewpoint. She would, Scytale knew, see Edric as a repellent
 figure: the bold stare, those monstrous feet and hands moving softly in the
 gas, the smoky swirling of orange eddies around him. She would wonder
 about his sex habits, thinking how odd it would be to mate with such a one.
 Even the field-force generator which recreated for Edric the weightlessness
 of space would set him apart from her now.
 “Princess,” Scytale said, “because of Edric here, your husband’s oracular
 sight cannot stumble upon certain incidents, including this one …
 presumably.”
 “Presumably,” Irulan said.
 Eyes closed, the Reverend Mother nodded. “The phenomenon of
 prescience is poorly understood even by its initiates,” she said.
 “I am a full Guild Navigator and have the Power,” Edric said.
 Again, the Reverend Mother opened her eyes. This time, she stared at the
 Face Dancer, eyes probing with that peculiar Bene Gesserit intensity. She
 was weighing minutiae.
 “No, Reverend Mother,” Scytale murmured, “I am not as simple as I
 appeared.”
 “We don’t understand this Power of second sight,” Irulan said. “There’s a
 point. Edric says my husband cannot see, know or predict what happens
 within the sphere of a Navigator’s influence. But how far does that
 influence extend?”
 “There are people and things in our universe which I know only by their
 effects,” Edric said, his fish mouth held in a thin line. “I know they have
 been here … there … somewhere. As water creatures stir up the currents in
 their passage, so the prescient stir up Time. I have seen where your husband
has been; never have I seen him nor the people who truly share his aims and
 loyalties. This is the concealment which an adept gives to those who are
 his.”
 “Irulan is not yours,” Scytale said. And he looked sideways at the
 Princess.
 “We all know why the conspiracy must be conducted only in my
 presence,” Edric said.
 Using the voice mode for describing a machine, Irulan said: “You have
 your uses, apparently.”
 She sees him now for what he is, Scytale thought. Good!
 “The future is a thing to be shaped,” Scytale said. “Hold that thought,
 Princess.”
 Irulan glanced at the Face Dancer.
 “People who share Paul’s aims and loyalties,” she said. “Certain of his
 Fremen legionaries, then, wear his cloak. I have seen him prophesy for
 them, heard their cries of adulation for their Mahdi, their Muad’dib.”
 It has occurred to her, Scytale thought, that she is on trial here, that a
 judgment remains to be made which could preserve her or destroy her. She
 sees the trap we set for her.
 Momentarily, Scytale’s gaze locked with that of the Reverend Mother
 and he experienced the odd realization that they had shared this thought
 about Irulan. The Bene Gesserit, of course, had briefed their Princess,
 primed her with the lie adroit. But the moment always came when a Bene
 Gesserit must trust her own training and instincts.
 “Princess, I know what it is you most desire from the Emperor,” Edric
 said.
 “Who does not know it?” Irulan asked.
 “You wish to be the founding mother of the royal dynasty,” Edric said, as
 though he had not heard her. “Unless you join us, that will never happen.
 Take my oracular word on it. The Emperor married you for political
 reasons, but you’ll never share his bed.”
 “So the oracle is also a voyeur,” Irulan sneered.
 “The Emperor is more firmly wedded to his Fremen concubine than he is
 to you!” Edric snapped.
 “And she gives him no heir,” Irulan said.
 “Reason is the first victim of strong emotion,” Scytale murmured. He
 sensed the outpouring of Irulan’s anger, saw his admonition take effect.
“She gives him no heir,” Irulan said, her voice measuring out controlled
 calmness, “because I am secretly administering a contraceptive. Is that the
 sort of admission you wanted from me?”
 “It’d not be a thing for the Emperor to discover,” Edric said, smiling.
 “I have lies ready for him,” Irulan said. “He may have truthsense, but
 some lies are easier to believe than the truth.”
 “You must make the choice, Princess,” Scytale said, “but understand
 what it is protects you.”
 “Paul is fair with me,” she said. “I sit in his Council.”
 “In the twelve years you’ve been his Princess Consort,” Edric asked, “has
 he shown you the slightest warmth?”
 Irulan shook her head.
 “He deposed your father with his infamous Fremen horde, married you to
 fix his claim to the throne, yet he has never crowned you Empress,” Edric
 said.
 “Edric tries to sway you with emotion, Princess,” Scytale said. “Is that
 not interesting?”
 She glanced at the Face Dancer, saw the bold smile on his features,
 answered it with raised eyebrows. She was fully aware now, Scytale saw,
 that if she left this conference under Edric’s sway, part of their plot, these
 moments might be concealed from Paul’s oracular vision. If she withheld
 commitment, though …
 “Does it seem to you, Princess,” Scytale asked, “that Edric holds undue
 sway in our conspiracy?”
 “I’ve already agreed,” Edric said, “that I’ll defer to the best judgment
 offered in our councils.”
 “And who chooses the best judgment?” Scytale asked.
 “Do you wish the Princess to leave here without joining us?” Edric
 asked.
 “He wishes her commitment to be a real one,” the Reverend Mother
 growled. “There should be no trickery between us.”
 Irulan, Scytale saw, had relaxed into a thinking posture, hands concealed
 in the sleeves of her robe. She would be thinking now of the bait Edric had
 offered: to found a royal dynasty! She would be wondering what scheme
 the conspirators had provided to protect themselves from her. She would be
 weighing many things.
“Scytale,” Irulan said presently, “it is said that you Tleilaxu have an odd
 system of honor: your victims must always have a means of escape.”
 “If they can but find it,” Scytale agreed.
 “Am I a victim?” Irulan asked.
 A burst of laughter escaped Scytale.
 The Reverend Mother snorted.
 “Princess,” Edric said, his voice softly persuasive, “you already are one
 of us, have no fear of that. Do you not spy upon the Imperial Household for
 your Bene Gesserit superiors?”
 “Paul knows I report to my teachers,” she said.
 “But don’t you give them the material for strong propaganda against your
 Emperor?” Edric asked.
 Not “our” Emperor, Scytale noted. “Your” Emperor. Irulan is too much
 the Bene Gesserit to miss that slip.
 “The question is one of powers and how they may be used,” Scytale said,
 moving closer to the Guildsman’s tank. “We of the Tleilaxu believe that in
 all the universe there is only the insatiable appetite of matter, that energy is
 the only true solid. And energy learns. Hear me well, Princess: energy
 learns. This, we call power.”
 “You haven’t convinced me we can defeat the Emperor,” Irulan said.
 “We haven’t even convinced ourselves,” Scytale said.
 “Everywhere we turn,” Irulan said, “his power confronts us. He’s the
 kwisatz haderach, the one who can be many places at once. He’s the Mahdi
 whose merest whim is absolute command to his Qizarate missionaries. He’s
 the mentat whose computational mind surpasses the greatest ancient
 computers. He is Muad’dib whose orders to the Fremen legions depopulate
 planets. He possesses oracular vision which sees into the future. He has that
 gene pattern which we Bene Gesserits covet for—”
 “We know his attributes,” the Reverend Mother interrupted. “And we
 know the abomination, his sister Alia, possesses this gene pattern. But
 they’re also humans, both of them. Thus, they have weaknesses.”
 “And where are those human weaknesses?” the Face Dancer asked.
 “Shall we search for them in the religious arm of his Jihad? Can the
 Emperor’s Qizara be turned against him? What about the civil authority of
 the Great Houses? Can the Landsraad Congress do more than raise a verbal
 clamor?”
“I suggest the Combine Honnete Ober Advancer Mercantiles,” Edric said
 turning in his tank. “CHOAM is business and business follows profits.”
 “Or perhaps the Emperor’s mother,” Scytale said. “The Lady Jessica, I
 understand, remains on Caladan, but is in frequent communication with her
 son.”
 “That traitorous bitch,” Mohiam said, voice level. “Would I might
 disown my own hands which trained her.”
 “Our conspiracy requires a lever,” Scytale said.
 “We are more than conspirators,” the Reverend Mother countered.
 “Ah, yes,” Scytale agreed. “We are energetic and we learn quickly. This
 makes us the one true hope, the certain salvation of humankind.” He spoke
 in the speech mode for absolute conviction, which was perhaps the ultimate
 sneer coming, as it did, from a Tleilaxu.
 Only the Reverend Mother appeared to understand the subtlety. “Why?”
 she asked, directing the question at Scytale.
 Before the Face Dancer could answer, Edric cleared his throat, said: “Let
 us not bandy philosophical nonsense. Every question can be boiled down to
 the one: ‘Why is there anything?’ Every religious, business and
 governmental question has the single derivative: ‘Who will exercise the
 power?’ Alliances, combines, complexes, they all chase mirages unless they
 go for the power. All else is nonsense, as most thinking beings come to
 realize.”
 Scytale shrugged, a gesture designed solely for the Reverend Mother.
 Edric had answered her question for him. The pontificating fool was their
 major weakness. To make sure the Reverend Mother understood, Scytale
 said: “Listening carefully to the teacher, one acquires an education.”
 The Reverend Mother nodded slowly.
 “Princess,” Edric said, “make your choice. You have been chosen as an
 instrument of destiny, the very finest …”
 “Save your praise for those who can be swayed by it,” Irulan said.
 “Earlier, you mentioned a ghost, a revenant with which we may
 contaminate the Emperor. Explain this.”
 “The Atreides will defeat himself!” Edric crowed.
 “Stop talking riddles!” Irulan snapped. “What is this ghost?”
 “A very unusual ghost,” Edric said. “It has a body and a name. The body
 —that’s the flesh of a renowned swordmaster known as Duncan Idaho. The
 name …”
“Idaho’s dead,” Irulan said. “Paul has mourned the loss often in my
 presence. He saw Idaho killed by my father’s Sardaukar.”
 “Even in defeat,” Edric said, “your father’s Sardaukar did not abandon
 wisdom. Let us suppose a wise Sardaukar commander recognized the
 sword-master in a corpse his men had slain. What then? There exist uses for
 such flesh and training … if one acts swiftly.”
 “A Tleilaxu ghola,” Irulan whispered, looking sideways at Scytale.
 Scytale, observing her attention, exercised his Face Dancer powers—
 shape flowing into shape, flesh moving and readjusting. Presently, a slender
 man stood before her. The face remained somewhat round, but darker and
 with slightly flattened features. High cheekbones formed shelves for eyes
 with definite epicanthic folds. The hair was black and unruly.
 “A ghola of this appearance,” Edric said, pointing to Scytale.
 “Or merely another Face Dancer?” Irulan asked.
 “No Face Dancer,” Edric said. “A Face Dancer risks exposure under
 prolonged surveillance. No; let us assume that our wise Sardaukar
 commander had Idaho’s corpse preserved for the axolotl tanks. Why not?
 This corpse held the flesh and nerves of one of the finest swordsmen in
 history, an adviser to the Atreides, a military genius. What a waste to lose
 all that training and ability when it might be revived as an instructor for the
 Sardaukar.”
 “I heard not a whisper of this and I was one of my father’s confi dantes,”
 Irulan said.
 “Ahh, but your father was a defeated man and within a few hours you
 had been sold to the new Emperor,” Edric said.
 “Was it done?” she demanded.
 With a maddening air of complacency, Edric said: “Let us presume that
 our wise Sardaukar commander, knowing the need for speed, immediately
 sent the preserved flesh of Idaho to the Bene Tleilax. Let us suppose further
 that the commander and his men died before conveying this information to
 your father—who couldn’t have made much use of it anyway. There would
 remain then a physical fact, a bit of flesh which had been sent off to the
 Tleilaxu. There was only one way for it to be sent, of course, on a
 heighliner. We of the Guild naturally know every cargo we transport.
 Learning of this one, would we not think it additional wisdom to purchase
 the ghola as a gift befitting an Emperor?”
 “You’ve done it then,” Irulan said.
Scytale, who had resumed his roly-poly first appearance, said: “As our
 long-winded friend indicates, we’ve done it.”
 “How has Idaho been conditioned?” Irulan asked.
 “Idaho?” Edric asked, looking at the Tleilaxu. “Do you know of an
 Idaho, Scytale?”
 “We sold you a creature called Hayt,” Scytale said.
 “Ah, yes—Hayt,” Edric said. “Why did you sell him to us?”
 “Because we once bred a kwisatz haderach of our own,” Scytale said.
 With a quick movement of her old head, the Reverend Mother looked up
 at him. “You didn’t tell us that!” she accused.
 “You didn’t ask,” Scytale said.
 “How did you overcome your kwisatz haderach?” Irulan asked.
 “A creature who has spent his life creating one particular representation
 of his selfdom will die rather than become the antithesis of that
 representation,” Scytale said.
 “I do not understand,” Edric ventured.
 “He killed himself,” the Reverend Mother growled.
 “Follow me well, Reverend Mother,” Scytale warned, using a voice mode
 which said: You are not a sex object, have never been a sex object, cannot
 be a sex object.
 The Tleilaxu waited for the blatant emphasis to sink in. She must not
 mistake his intent. Realization must pass through anger into awareness that
 the Tleilaxu certainly could not make such an accusation, knowing as he
 must the breeding requirements of the Sisterhood. His words, though,
 contained a gutter insult, completely out of character for a Tleilaxu.
 Swiftly, using the mirabhasa placative mode, Edric tried to smooth over
 the moment. “Scytale, you told us you sold Hayt because you shared our
 desire on how to use him.”
 “Edric, you will remain silent until I give you permission to speak,”
 Scytale said. And as the Guildsman started to protest, the Reverend Mother
 snapped: “Shut up, Edric!”
 The Guildsman drew back into his tank in flailing agitation.
 “Our own transient emotions aren’t pertinent to a solution of the mutual
 problem,” Scytale said. “They cloud reasoning because the only relevant
 emotion is the basic fear which brought us to this meeting.”
 “We understand,” Irulan said, glancing at the Reverend Mother.
“You must see the dangerous limitations of our shield,” Scytale said.
 “The oracle cannot chance upon what it cannot understand.”
 “You are devious, Scytale,” Irulan said.
 How devious she must not guess, Scytale thought. When this is done, we
 will possess a kwisatz haderach we can control. These others will possess
 nothing.
 “What was the origin of your kwisatz haderach?” the Reverend Mother
 asked.
 “We’ve dabbled in various pure essences,” Scytale said. “Pure good and
 pure evil. A pure villain who delights only in creating pain and terror can be
 quite educational.”
 “The old Baron Harkonnen, our Emperor’s grandfather, was he a
 Tleilaxu creation?” Irulan asked.
 “Not one of ours,” Scytale said. “But then nature often produces
 creations as deadly as ours. We merely produce them under conditions
 where we can study them.”
 “I will not be passed by and treated this way!” Edric protested. “Who is it
 hides this meeting from—”
 “You see?” Scytale asked. “Whose best judgment conceals us? What
 judgment?”
 “I wish to discuss our mode of giving Hayt to the Emperor,” Edric
 insisted. “It’s my understanding that Hayt reflects the old morality that the
 Atreides learned on his birthworld. Hayt is supposed to make it easy for the
 Emperor to enlarge his moral nature, to delineate the positive-negative
 elements of life and religion.”
 Scytale smiled, passing a benign gaze over his companions. They were as
 he’d been led to expect. The old Reverend Mother wielded her emotions
 like a scythe. Irulan had been well trained for a task at which she had failed,
 a flawed Bene Gesserit creation. Edric was no more (and no less) than the
 magician’s hand: he might conceal and distract. For now, Edric relapsed
 into sullen silence as the others ignored him.
 “Do I understand that this Hayt is intended to poison Paul’s psyche?”
 Irulan asked.
 “More or less,” Scytale said.
 “And what of the Qizarate?” Irulan asked.
 “It requires only the slightest shift in emphasis, a glissade of the
 emotions, to transform envy into enmity,” Scytale said.
“And CHOAM?” Irulan asked.
 “They will rally round profit,” Scytale said.
 “What of the other power groups?”
 “One invokes the name of government,” Scytale said. “We will annex the
 less powerful in the name of morality and progress. Our opposition will die
 of its own entanglements.”
 “Alia, too?”
 “Hayt is a multi-purpose ghola,” Scytale said. “The Emperor’s sister is of
 an age when she can be distracted by a charming male designed for that
 purpose. She will be attracted by his maleness and by his abilities as a
 mentat.”
 Mohiam allowed her old eyes to go wide in surprise. “The ghola’s a
 mentat? That’s a dangerous move.”
 “To be accurate,” Irulan said, “a mentat must have accurate data. What if
 Paul asks him to define the purpose behind our gift?”
 “Hayt will tell the truth,” Scytale said. “It makes no difference.”
 “So you leave an escape door open for Paul,” Irulan said.
 “A mentat!” Mohiam muttered.
 Scytale glanced at the old Reverend Mother, seeing the ancient hates
 which colored her responses. From the days of the Butlerian Jihad when
 “thinking machines” had been wiped from most of the universe, computers
 had inspired distrust. Old emotions colored the human computer as well.
 “I do not like the way you smile,” Mohiam said abruptly, speaking in the
 truth mode as she glared up at Scytale.
 In the same mode, Scytale said: “And I think less of what pleases you.
 But we must work together. We all see that.” He glanced at the Guildsman.
 “Don’t we, Edric?”
 “You teach painful lessons,” Edric said. “I presume you wished to make
 it plain that I must not assert myself against the combined judgments of my
 fellow conspirators.”
 “You see, he can be taught,” Scytale said.
 “I see other things as well,” Edric growled. “The Atreides holds a
 monopoly on the spice. Without it I cannot probe the future. The Bene
 Gesserit lose their truthsense. We have stockpiles, but these are finite.
 Melange is a powerful coin.”
 “Our civilization has more than one coin,” Scytale said. “Thus, the law of
 supply and demand fails.”
“You think to steal the secret of it,” Mohiam wheezed. “And him with a
 planet guarded by his mad Fremen!”
 “The Fremen are civil, educated and ignorant,” Scytale said. “They’re not
 mad. They’re trained to believe, not to know. Belief can be manipulated.
 Only knowledge is dangerous.”
 “But will I be left with something to father a royal dynasty?” Irulan
 asked.
 They all heard the commitment in her voice, but only Edric smiled at it.
 “Something,” Scytale said. “Something.”
 “It means the end of this Atreides as a ruling force,” Edric said.
 “I should imagine that others less gifted as oracles have made that
 prediction,” Scytale said. “For them, mektub al mellah, as the Fremen say.”
 “The thing was written with salt,” Irulan translated.
 As she spoke, Scytale recognized what the Bene Gesserit had arrayed
 here for him—a beautiful and intelligent female who could never be his.
 Ah, well, he thought, perhaps I’ll copy her for another.
